Adaptoid Reverse Engineering                                 Analysis Note
wishk201.sys                                                 2001 driver


                        KNOWN DEFECTS


Abstract

   Three defects have been found during reverse engineering: two
   arithmetic ones in wishk201.sys, and a race in wishh201.dll. This note
   records each one, the exact condition that triggers it, what it would
   actually do, and whether a user would be likely to notice. It also
   records one claim that was made here and later RETRACTED, in section 3.

   The purpose is not to criticise a driver that shipped in 2001 and
   worked. It is to stop a clean-room replacement from faithfully
   reproducing a slip, and to record which observed behaviour is
   deliberate and which is accidental.

   All three are in peripheral paths. NONE of them is in the script
   interpreter, the HID report descriptor, the keyboard or mouse report
   builders, or the private IOCTL surface. A user running complex
   scripts would not encounter any of them, which is consistent with the
   software's reputation for robustness.

Table of Contents

   1.  Severity Summary
   2.  Defect 1: Button Map Filler Entries
   3.  RETRACTED: Cross-Coupled Stick Acceleration Is Not A Defect
   4.  Defect 3: Swapped Sine Interpolation Weights
   5.  Defect 4: Race On The Launch-Detection Path Buffer
   6.  What Is Not Affected

1.  Severity Summary

       defect                     path            active by default
       ------------------------   -------------   -----------------
       button map filler entries  joystick report  yes, but needs a
                                                   rare button combo
       (stick cross-coupling)     joystick report  RETRACTED, see 3
       sine interpolation         effect engine    only if an effect
                                                   slot is running
       launch-detection race      wishh201.dll     only with Detect
                                                   Game Launches on

2.  Defect 1: Button Map Filler Entries

   Location:  drv_BuildJoystickReport, the button loop at 000153a3
              drv_ButtonMap at 00019d80

   drv_ButtonMap has 16 entries, one per bit of the N64 button word, but
   only 14 of those bits are buttons. Bit positions 8 and 9 are Reset and
   an unused bit, and their table entries hold 0.

   The loop does not special-case them. It executes

       mask |= 1 << drv_ButtonMap[index]

   unconditionally for all 16 indices, so an index holding the filler
   value 0 asserts HID button 1 - the same bit that A uses.

   Trigger:  the N64 controller asserts its Reset bit when L + R + Start
             are pressed together. That is the only realistic way bit 8
             becomes set, and it is confirmed by the configurator, which
             names the bit 8 script handler on_lrs - L, R, Start.

   Effect:   while L + R + Start is held, the gamepad reports button 1
             as pressed even though A is not.

   Would it be noticed? Rarely. L + R + Start is the controller reset
   combination, not something pressed during play. It also overlaps the
   on-controller tuning combination L + R + Z + Start, during which a
   spurious A press is unlikely to be observed.

   For a replacement: treat a map entry of 0 at indices 8 and 9 as "no
   button", or better, give the table a sentinel such as 0xFF for "not a
   button" and test for it.

3.  RETRACTED: Cross-Coupled Stick Acceleration Is Not A Defect

   An earlier revision of this note recorded the cross-coupled stick term in
   drv_BuildJoystickReport as an arithmetic defect. THAT WAS WRONG, and this
   section records the correction rather than deleting the claim.

   The term is applied as

       X += (|Y| * k * X) / 256
       Y += (|X| * k * Y) / 256

   with k taken from devext+0x3F0, which drv_AddDevice initialises to 10. The
   earlier reading was that a conventional acceleration curve would use each
   axis's own magnitude, so cross-coupling looked like a transposition slip.

   It is not acceleration. The vendor SDK, shipped as sdk_1163b.zip and
   documented in src/dxsample/dxescape.cpp, names these two parameters and
   describes exactly this transform:

       0x7834BB10   joystick clipping range   default 75   devext+0x3EC
       0x7834BB11   joystick corner stretch   default 10   devext+0x3F0

   and says of the second, verbatim:

       "Corner stretching is used by the Adaptoid driver to map the octagonal
       range of the analog stick to the square range expected by PC games.
       [...] The default value of 10 warps the maximum deflection of 65 out
       to 75 in the corners, matching the default range clipping of 75 in the
       horizontal and vertical directions. [...] Note that the warping is
       smooth and linear across the full range."

   The N64 stick's gate is octagonal. It reaches about 80 raw units on an
   axis but only about 65 into a diagonal corner, so a diagonal can never
   reach full scale. A term that is ZERO on-axis and MAXIMAL on the diagonal
   is precisely the correction needed, and cross-coupling is the only way to
   express it. Using each axis's own magnitude - the "fix" the earlier
   revision proposed - would have boosted the axes that already reach full
   scale and done nothing for the corners, which is the opposite of what is
   wanted.

   The arithmetic in the earlier revision proves the point once it is read
   correctly. Reports are raw * 16, clipped at 1200, so 1200/16 = 75 is the
   clipping range. At the diagonal maximum of 65 raw on each axis:

       base  = 65 * 16                 = 1040
       boost = (65 * 10 * 65) / 256    =  165
       final = 1040 + 165             = 1205, clipped to 1200

   1200 is full scale. The corner reaches it exactly, which is the documented
   behaviour: 65 warped out to 75. The earlier note recorded the same number
   and described the clip as "hiding the error", when reaching full diagonal
   deflection was the entire purpose.

   For a replacement: implement this deliberately, and expose both
   parameters. Setting corner stretch to 0 disables the warp and setting
   range clipping to 128 restores the controller's raw range, both documented
   by the SDK. Neither is a bug to be fixed.

   LESSON, recorded because it generalises: the cross-coupling looked wrong
   against an assumed intent (acceleration) that the code never claimed. The
   driver alone did not name the parameters. It was only the vendor's own
   documentation that supplied the intent, and with the right intent the code
   is correct. Where a routine's PURPOSE is inferred rather than read, a
   "defect" in it is only as sound as that inference.

4.  Defect 3: Swapped Sine Interpolation Weights

   Location:  drv_SineLerp at 000149a0, verified in the disassembly at
              000149c2 through 000149df

   The routine interpolates drv_SineTable, whose entries are
   1000 * sin(i * 5 degrees). Linear interpolation should pair
   table[idx] with (500 - rem) and table[idx+1] with rem. The code does
   the reverse:

       000149c2  MOVSX ECX, word ptr [ESI*2 + 0x19d02]   ; table[idx+1]
       000149cf  SUB   EAX, EDX                          ; 500 - rem
       000149d1  IMUL  ECX, EAX                          ; wrong pairing
       000149d4  MOVSX EAX, word ptr [ESI*2 + 0x19d00]   ; table[idx]
       000149dc  IMUL  EAX, EDX

   Within every 5-degree cell the output therefore runs backwards:

       angle (hundredths of a degree)    0    250    499    500
       returned                        870    435      1   1740
       correct                           0    435    869    871

   The result is a rising sawtooth rather than a sine. It is correct only
   where two adjacent table entries are equal, which happens at the top
   of the quarter wave.

   Trigger:  any running effect slot, since drv_EffectEvaluate calls this
             for every evaluation.

   Effect:   whatever the effect engine drives receives a sawtooth with a
             20-step discontinuity per quarter cycle instead of a smooth
             sine.

   Would it be noticed? Only by someone using the effect engine. If, as
   inferred, the engine drives Rumble Pak feedback through duty-cycle
   modulation, the result would feel buzzy or uneven rather than smooth -
   easily attributed to the Rumble Pak itself rather than to the driver.
   It has no effect on scripts, remapping, or any HID report.

   For a replacement: implement the interpolation correctly. Nothing
   should depend on the sawtooth.

5.  Defect 4: Race On The Launch-Detection Path Buffer

   Location:  wishh201.dll hook_ShellProc at 10001000
              the shared buffer hook_g_szLastModulePath at 10005008

   On HSHELL_WINDOWCREATED the hook posts its notification to the
   configurator FIRST, and only then writes the launching process's image
   path into a buffer in the DLL's shared .sdata section. There is exactly
   one such buffer for the whole system, and the configurator reads it
   asynchronously through GetInfo when it gets round to processing message
   0x47B.

   Trigger: two processes creating their first window close enough together
   that the second hook invocation overwrites the buffer before the
   configurator has drained the first message.

   Effect: the configurator reads the wrong image path. It either activates
   the script bound to the wrong game, or finds no match at all and logs
   "Launch detection failed to retrieve...".

   Would it be noticed? Only with DetectGameLaunches enabled, and only when
   two applications start at once - a login, or a game started through a
   launcher process. The visible symptom is a profile that silently fails to
   switch, which a user would retry rather than report.

   Unlike the other three, this one is NOT arithmetic and NOT in the driver.
   It is a design choice in the smallest of the three binaries.

   For a replacement: do not reproduce it. The path belongs in the message,
   not beside it - posting a copy, or using WM_COPYDATA, removes the shared
   buffer entirely. Better still, a modern replacement should not use a
   global WH_SHELL hook at all. A WMI __InstanceCreationEvent subscription on
   Win32_Process, or an ETW process-start session, delivers the image path
   atomically with the event and needs no DLL injected into every process on
   the machine.

6.  What Is Not Affected

   It is worth stating plainly which paths were examined and found free
   of these defects, because the practical reliability of the original
   software depends on them:

   -  The script compiler in wishd201.exe and the bytecode it emits.
   -  The bytecode interpreter drv_ScriptExecute, including its bounds
      checks and the 100000-instruction budget.
   -  The native builtin library drv_ScriptNativeCall, including the
      thread, sleep, button and stick primitives.
   -  The keyboard and mouse report builders drv_HidKeyEvent,
      drv_HidMouseButtonEvent and drv_HidMouseMoveEvent, all of which
      assemble reports that match the descriptor byte for byte.
   -  The HID report descriptors themselves and their selection.
   -  The private IOCTL surface and the dispatch wrapper triage.
   -  The Controller Pak CRCs, which are the genuine N64 algorithms.

   A user writing complex scripts exercises every item in that list and
   none of the three defects. That is the reason the software behaves
   robustly in practice despite them.
